.. currentmodule:: nilearn

.. include:: names.rst

0.10.2
======

**Released September 2023**

HIGHLIGHTS
----------

- :bdg-info:`Plotting` Volume plotting functions like :func:`~plotting.plot_img` now have an optional ``radiological`` parameter, defaulting to ``False``. If ``True``, this will invert the x-axis and ``L`` and ``R`` annotations to confirm to radiological conventional view. (:gh:`3172` by `Konrad Wagstyl`_ and `Yasmin Mzayek`_).

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Update Decoder objects to use the more efficient ``LogisticRegressionCV`` (:gh:`3736` by `Michelle Wang`_).

- :bdg-success:`API` Add ``LassoCV`` as a new estimator option for Decoder objects (:gh:`3781` by `Michelle Wang`_)

- :bdg-success:`API` Add ``vmin`` and ``symmetric_cbar`` arguments to :func:`~nilearn.plotting.plot_img_on_surf` (:gh:`3873` by `Michelle Wang`_).

- :bdg-success:`API` Improve ``contrasts`` allowing fixed effects on F contrasts (:gh:`3203` by `Bertrand Thirion`_)

- :bdg-success:`API` New experimental surface API to facilitate working with surface data in downstream surface-based analyses. We provide this API as a nilearn.experimental.surface module as it is still incomplete and subject to change without a deprecation cycle. (:gh:`3856` by `Jerome Dockes`_).

NEW
---

- :bdg-info:`Plotting` Volume plotting functions like :func:`~plotting.plot_img` now have an optional ``radiological`` parameter, defaulting to ``False``. If ``True``, this will invert the x-axis and ``L`` and ``R`` annotations to confirm to radiological conventional view. (:gh:`3172` by `Konrad Wagstyl`_ and `Yasmin Mzayek`_).

- :bdg-success:`API` New experimental surface API to facilitate working with surface data in downstream surface-based analyses. We provide this API as a nilearn.experimental.surface module as it is still incomplete and subject to change without a deprecation cycle. (:gh:`3856` by `Jerome Dockes`_).

Fixes
-----

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Fix bug in method ``transform_imgs`` of :class:`~maskers.MultiNiftiMapsMasker` and :class:`~maskers.MultiNiftiLabelsMasker` that would raise an error if a list of ``sample_mask`` was specified to ``fit_transform`` (:gh:`3971` by `Alexandre Cionca`_).

- :bdg-info:`Plotting` Fix bug in ``nilearn.plotting.surf_plotting._plot_surf_matplotlib`` that would make vertices transparent when saving in PDF or SVG format (:gh:`3860` by `Mathieu Dugré`_).

- :bdg-info:`Plotting` Fix bug that would prevent using ``symmetric_cmap=True`` or the ``avg_method`` argument with :func:`~plotting.plot_surf_roi` (:gh:`3942` by `Rémi Gau`_).

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Fixes a bug that would lead to an error when loading a fsaverage surface while relying on numpy >= 1.24.x (:gh:`3644` by `Rémi Gau`_).

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Fix bug that would prevent loading the confounds of a gifti file in actual fmriprep datasets (:gh:`3819` by `Rémi Gau`_).

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Fix bug that prevented using dataframes as input for second level GLM when computing contrasts (:gh:`3879` by `Rémi Gau`_).

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Fix bug in :func:`~glm.first_level.first_level_from_bids` that returned no confound files if the corresponding bold files contained derivatives BIDS entities (:gh:`3742` by `Rémi Gau`_).

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Fix bug in :func:`~glm.first_level.first_level_from_bids` that would throw a warning about ``slice_time_ref`` not being provided even when it was (:gh:`3811` by `Rémi Gau`_).

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Fix bug where the ``cv_params_`` attribute of fitter Decoder objects sometimes had missing entries if ``grid_param`` is a sequence of dicts with different keys (:gh:`3733` by `Michelle Wang`_).

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Make the :func:`~nilearn.interfaces.fmriprep.load_confounds` confounds file selection more generic (:gh:`3794` by `Taylor Salo`_).

- :bdg-info:`Plotting` Change default figure sizes to prevent titles from overlapping figure content (:gh:`3797` by `Yasmin Mzayek`_ and see also :gh:`2804` by `Oliver Warrington`_)

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Relax the :func:`~nilearn.interfaces.fmriprep.load_confounds` confounds selection on ``cosine`` as not all confound files contained the variables (:gh:`3816` by `Hao-Ting Wang`_).

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Fix ``pathlib.Path`` not being counted as Niimg-like object in :func:`~image.new_img_like` (:gh:`3723` by `Maximilian Cosmo Sitter`_).

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Fix ``fit_transform`` behavior to match when ``fit`` method is passed image data (:gh:`3897` by `Yasmin Mzayek`_)

- :bdg-info:`Plotting` Allow using both vmin and threshold with "plotly" engine to be consistent with "matplotlib" behavior (:gh:`3945` by `Yasmin Mzayek`_)

- :bdg-info:`Plotting` Set edgecolors to be the same as facecolors in :func:`~plotting.plot_surf_contours` so that ROI contours are rendered clearly (:gh:`3973` by `Yasmin Mzayek`_)

- :bdg-success:`API` Refactor deprecation of behavior of :func:`~datasets.fetch_atlas_craddock_2012`, :func:`~datasets.fetch_atlas_smith_2009` and :func:`~datasets.fetch_atlas_basc_multiscale_2015` fetchers including using API consistent ``maps`` key (:gh:`3987` by `Yasmin Mzayek`_)

Enhancements
------------

- :bdg-secondary:`Doc` Add cross-reference links to type definitions in public surface functions (:gh:`3857` by `Hao-Ting Wang`_).

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Update Decoder objects to use the more efficient ``LogisticRegressionCV`` (:gh:`3736` by `Michelle Wang`_).

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Throw warning in :func:`~glm.first_level.first_level_from_bids` when using event.tsv files with no trial type column (:gh:`3597` by `Aswin Vijayan`_, `Rémi Gau`_).

- :bdg-success:`API` Make return key names in the description file of destrieux surface consistent with :func:`~datasets.fetch_atlas_surf_destrieux` (:gh:`3774` by `Tarun Samanta`_).

- :bdg-success:`API` Add ``LassoCV`` as a new estimator option for Decoder objects (:gh:`3781` by `Michelle Wang`_)

- :bdg-success:`API` Add ``vmin`` and ``symmetric_cbar`` arguments to :func:`~nilearn.plotting.plot_img_on_surf` (:gh:`3873` by `Michelle Wang`_).

- :bdg-success:`API` Improve ``generate_report`` method of maskers by allowing users to pass a cmap argument for plotting image (:gh:`3897` by `Yasmin Mzayek`_)

- :bdg-success:`API` Improve ``contrasts`` allowing fixed effects on F contrasts (:gh:`3203` by `Bertrand Thirion`_)

Changes
-------

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Validate the content of events files before plotting them (:gh:`3994` by `Rémi Gau`_).
- :bdg-dark:`Code` ``nilearn.glm.first_level.experimental_paradigm.check_events`` will now throw a warning if some events have a 0 second duration and will throw an error if an event has ``NaN`` onset or duration (:gh:`3943` by `Rémi Gau`_).
- :bdg-secondary:`Maint` Removed old files and test code from deprecated datasets COBRE and NYU resting state (:gh:`3743` by `Michelle Wang`_).
- :bdg-secondary:`Maint` PEP8 and isort compliance extended to the whole nilearn codebase. (:gh:`3538`, :gh:`3566`, :gh:`3548`, :gh:`3556`, :gh:`3601`, :gh:`3609`, :gh:`3646`, :gh:`3650`, :gh:`3647`, :gh:`3640`, :gh:`3615`, :gh:`3614`, :gh:`3648`,  :gh:`3651`  by `Rémi Gau`_).
- :bdg-secondary:`Maint` Finish applying black formatting to most of the codebase. (:gh:`3836`, :gh:`3833`, :gh:`3827`, :gh:`3810`, :gh:`3803`, :gh:`3802`, :gh:`3795`, :gh:`3790`, :gh:`3783`, :gh:`3777` by `Rémi Gau`_).
- :bdg-danger:`Deprecation` Empty region signals resulting from applying ``mask_img`` in :class:`~maskers.NiftiLabelsMasker` will no longer be kept in release 0.15. Meanwhile, use ``keep_masked_labels`` parameter when initializing the :class:`~maskers.NiftiLabelsMasker` object to enable/disable this behavior. (:gh:`3722` by `Mohammad Torabi`_).
- :bdg-danger:`Deprecation` Empty region signals resulting from applying ``mask_img`` in :class:`~maskers.NiftiMapsMasker` will no longer be kept in release 0.15. Meanwhile, use ``keep_masked_maps`` parameter when initializing the :class:`~maskers.NiftiMapsMasker` object to enable/disable this behavior. (:gh:`3732` by `Mohammad Torabi`_).
- :bdg-secondary:`Maint` Removed mention of license in "header" (:gh:`3838` by `Czarina Sy`_).
- :bdg-secondary:`Doc` Configure plots in example gallery for better rendering  (:gh:`3753` by `Yasmin Mzayek`_)
- :bdg-secondary:`Maint` Make one_mesh_info and full_brain_info into private functions _one_mesh_info and _full_brain_info (:gh:`3847` by `Rahul Brito`_)
- :bdg-secondary:`Maint` Refactor error raising tests using context managers (:gh:`3854` BY `François Paugam`_)
- :bdg-danger:`Deprecation` Added warning to deprecate ``darkness`` in ``surf_plotting._compute_facecolors_matplotlib`` and ``html_surface._get_vertexcolor`` (:gh`3855` by `Alisha Kodibagkar`_)
- :bdg-secondary:`Doc` Replace skipped doctests with default code-blocks (:gh:`3681` in by `Patrick Sadil`_)
- :bdg-secondary:`Maint` Move the ``~nilearn.plotting.html_surface._mix_colormaps`` to ``cm.py`` in :mod:`~nilearn.plotting` (:gh:`3919` by `Ahmad Chamma`_)
- :bdg-secondary:`Maint` Remove deprecation decorator from ``~nilearn.glm.regression`` (:gh:`3921` by `Ahmad Chamma`_)
- :bdg-success:`API` Expose ``standardize`` in :func:`~plotting.plot_carpet` and :class:`~connectome.ConnectivityMeasure` to handle "zscore" deprecation (:gh:`3927` by `Yasmin Mzayek`_).
- :bdg-secondary:`Doc` Example :ref:`sphx_glr_auto_examples_01_plotting_plot_prob_atlas.py` is shortened to speed up build time (:gh:`3934` by `Yasmin Mzayek`_)
