
.. currentmodule:: nilearn

.. include:: names.rst

0.2.5.1
=======

**Released August 2016**

This is a bugfix release.
The new minimum required version of ``scikit-learn`` is ``0.14.1``.

Changes
-------

- Default option for ``dim`` argument in plotting functions which uses :term:`MNI` template as a background image is now changed to 'auto' mode. Meaning that an automatic contrast setting on background image is applied by default.

- ``Scikit-learn`` validation tools have been imported and are now used to check consistency of input data, in SpaceNet for example.

New
---

- Add an option to select only off-diagonal elements in function ``sym_to_vec``. Also, the scaling of matrices is modified: we divide the diagonal by ``sqrt(2)`` instead of multiplying the off-diagonal elements.

- Connectivity examples rely on :class:`~connectome.ConnectivityMeasure`.

Fixes
-----

- ``Scipy 0.18`` introduces a bug in a corner-case of resampling. Nilearn ``0.2.5`` can give wrong results with ``scipy 0.18``, but this is fixed in ``0.2.6``.

- Broken links and references fixed in docs.


0.2.5
=====

**Released June 2016**

The ``0.2.5`` release includes plotting for connectomes and glass brain with
hemisphere-specific projection, as well as more didactic examples and
improved documentation.

New
---

- New display_mode options in functions :func:`~plotting.plot_glass_brain` and :func:`~plotting.plot_connectome`. It is possible to plot right and left hemisphere projections separately.

- New function :func:`~datasets.load_mni152_brain_mask` to load canonical brain mask image in :term:`MNI` template space.

- New function :func:`~datasets.fetch_icbm152_brain_gm_mask` to load brain grey matter mask image.

- New function :func:`~image.load_img` loads data from a filename or a list of filenames.

- New function :func:`~image.clean_img` applies the cleaning function :func:`~signal.clean` on all :term:`voxels<voxel>`.

- New simple data downloader :func:`~datasets.fetch_localizer_button_task` to simplify some examples.

- Function :func:`~datasets.fetch_localizer_contrasts` can now download a specific list of subjects rather than a range of subjects.

- New function :func:`~datasets.get_data_dirs` to check where nilearn downloads data.

Contributors
------------

Contributors (from ``git shortlog -ns 0.2.4..0.2.5``):

    * `Gael Varoquaux`_ (55)
    * `Alexandre Abraham`_ (39)
    * `Martin Perez-Guevara`_ (26)
    * `Kamalakar Reddy Daddy`_ (20)
    * `Amadeus Kanaan`_ (8)
    * `Alexandre Abadie`_ (3)
    * `Arthur Mensch`_ (3)
    * `Elvis Dohmatob`_ (3)
    * `Loic Estève`_ (3)
    * `Jerome Dockes`_ (2)
    * Alexandre M. S (1)
    * `Bertrand Thirion`_ (1)
    * Ivan Gonzalez (1)
    * `Roberto Guidotti`_ (1)
