
.. currentmodule:: nilearn

.. include:: names.rst

0.2.2
=====

**Released February 2016**

The ``0.2.2`` is a bugfix + dependency update release (for ``sphinx-gallery``).
It aims at preparing a renewal of the tutorials.

New
---

- :bdg-success:`API` Fetcher for Megatrawl Netmats dataset.

Enhancements
------------

- :bdg-success:`API` The default ``n_subjects=None`` in function :func:`~datasets.fetch_adhd` is now changed to ``n_subjects=30``.

- :bdg-secondary:`Maint` Flake8 is now run on pull requests.

- :bdg-secondary:`Maint` Reworking of the documentation organization.

- :bdg-secondary:`Maint` ``Sphinx-gallery`` updated to version ``0.1.1``.

Fixes
-----

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Fix ``symmetric_split`` behavior in function :func:`~datasets.fetch_atlas_harvard_oxford`.

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Fix casting errors when providing integer data to function :func:`~image.high_variance_confounds`.

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Class :class:`~maskers.NiftiSpheresMasker` handles radius smaller than the size of a :term:`voxel`.

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Class :class:`~regions.RegionExtractor` handles data containing ``Nans``.

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Confound regression does not force systematically the normalization of the confounds.

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Force time series normalization in :class:`~connectome.ConnectivityMeasure` and check dimensionality of the input.

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Function ``nilearn._utils.numpy_conversions.csv_to_array`` could consider valid CSV files as invalid.

- :bdg-secondary:`Maint` Fix matplotlib ``1.5.0`` compatibility in function :func:`~plotting.plot_prob_atlas`.

- :bdg-secondary:`Maint` Fix matplotlib backend choice on Mac OS X.

- :bdg-info:`Plotting` Function :func:`~plotting.find_xyz_cut_coords` raises a meaningful error when 4D data is provided instead of 3D.

Changes
-------

- :bdg-dark:`Code` Download progression message refreshing rate has been lowered to sparsify CircleCI logs.

- :bdg-danger:`Deprecation` Deprecated dataset downloading function have been removed.

Contributors
------------

Contributors (from ``git shortlog -ns 0.2.1..0.2.2``):

    * `Kamalakar Reddy Daddy`_ (39)
    * `Alexandre Abraham`_ (22)
    * `Loic Estève`_ (21)
    * `Gael Varoquaux`_ (19)
    * `Alexandre Abadie`_ (12)
    * `Salma Bougacha`_ (7)
    * `Danilo Bzdok`_ (3)
    * `Arthur Mensch`_ (1)
    * `Ben Cipollini`_ (1)
    * `Elvis Dohmatob`_ (1)
    * `Óscar Nájera`_ (1)
