
.. currentmodule:: nilearn

.. include:: names.rst

0.4.0
=====

**Released November 2017**

Highlights
----------

- :bdg-success:`API` New function :func:`~surface.vol_to_surf` to project volume data to the surface.

- :bdg-info:`Plotting` New function :func:`~plotting.plot_matrix` to display matrices, eg connectomes.

Enhancements
------------

- :bdg-success:`API` New function :func:`~surface.vol_to_surf` to project a 3d or 4d brain volume on the cortical surface.

- :bdg-success:`API` New parameter ``resampling_interpolation`` is added in most used plotting functions to have user control for faster visualizations.

- :bdg-success:`API` Expose function :func:`~image.coord_transform` for end users. Useful to transform coordinates (x, y, z) from one image space to another space.

- :bdg-success:`API` Function :func:`~image.resample_img` now takes a linear resampling option (implemented by Joe Necus).

- :bdg-success:`API` Function :func:`~datasets.fetch_atlas_talairach` to fetch the `Talairach atlas <http://talairach.org>`_ (:gh:`1523` by `Jerome Dockes`_).

- :bdg-success:`API` Class :class:`~decoding.SearchLight` has new parameter ``groups`` to do ``LeaveOneGroupOut`` type cv with new scikit-learn module model selection.

- :bdg-secondary:`Maint` Upgraded to ``Sphinx-Gallery 0.1.11``.

- :bdg-info:`Plotting` Enhancing the glass brain plotting in back view 'y' direction.

- :bdg-info:`Plotting` New function :func:`~plotting.plot_matrix` to display connectome matrices.

- :bdg-info:`Plotting` Enhancing new surface plotting functions, added new parameters ``axes`` and ``figure`` to accept user-specified instances in :func:`~plotting.plot_surf`, :func:`~plotting.plot_surf_stat_map`, and :func:`~plotting.plot_surf_roi`.

Fixes
-----

- :bdg-success:`API` Dimming factor applied to background image in plotting functions with ``dim`` parameter will no longer accepts as string ('-1'). An error will be raised.

- :bdg-secondary:`Maint` Fixed issues with ``matplotlib 2.1.0``.

- :bdg-secondary:`Maint` Fixed issues with ``SciPy 1.0.0``.

Changes
-------

- :bdg-success:`API` Function :func:`~image.smooth_img` no longer accepts smoothing parameter :term:`FWHM` as 0. Behavior is changed in according to the issues with recent ``SciPy`` version ``1.0.0``.

- :bdg-dark:`Code` ``dim`` factor range is slightly increased to -2 to 2 from -1 to 1. Range exceeding -1 meaning more increase in contrast should be cautiously set.

- :bdg-danger:`Deprecation` **Backward incompatible change**: Function :func:`~plotting.find_xyz_cut_coords` now takes a ``mask_img`` argument which is a niimg, rather than a ``mask`` argument, which used to be a numpy array.

- :bdg-danger:`Deprecation` The minimum required version for ``scipy`` is now ``0.14``.

- :bdg-danger:`Deprecation` Dropped support for ``Nibabel`` older than ``2.0.2``.

- :bdg-danger:`Deprecation` Using argument ``anat_img`` for placing background image in function :func:`~plotting.plot_prob_atlas` is deprecated. Use argument ``bg_img`` instead.

- :bdg-secondary:`Maint` The examples now use ``pandas`` for the behavioral information.

- :bdg-info:`Plotting` New ``anterior`` and ``posterior`` view added to the ``plot_surf`` family views.

Contributors
------------

The following people contributed to this release:

    * `Jerome Dockes`_ (127)
    * `Gael Varoquaux`_ (62)
    * `Kamalakar Reddy Daddy`_ (36)
    * Jeff Chiang (11)
    * `Elizabeth DuPre`_ (9)
    * `Jona Sassenhagen`_ (9)
    * `Sylvain Lan`_ (7)
    * J Necus (6)
    * `Pierre-Olivier Quirion`_ (5)
    * AnaLu (3)
    * `Jean-Rémi King` (3)
    * MADHYASTHA Meghana (3)
    * `Salma Bougacha`_ (3)
    * sfvnMAC (3)
    * `Eric Larson`_ (2)
    * `Christian Horea`_ (2)
    * `Moritz Boos`_ (2)
    * `Alex Rothberg`_ (1)
    * `Bertrand Thirion`_ (1)
    * Christophe Bedetti (1)
    * John Griffiths (1)
    * `Mehdi Rahim`_ (1)
    * Sylvain LANNUZEL (1)
    * Yaroslav Halchenko (1)
    * clfs (1)
